Welcome back up until this point we talked about sorting algorithm bubble sort insertion sort selection
sort that were called elementary sorts.
They were OK but they have those nested for loops.
And most of the time it was all over and square which was a little bit slow.
Can we do better.
Well yes we can.
We're going to encounter our last big show on our list o of and log and now in order to understand what
all of N log and means we have to talk about our next sorting algorithm merge sort and quicksort.
You see unlike bubble sort and insertion sort and selection sort.
They use the technique that we've heard of before.
Divide and conquer.
We learned about this when learning about trees remember when looking through a phone book we open up
that book not from the first page from the middle page and we keep breaking up the pages until we find
the name we're looking for.
And merge sort.
And quicksort use this concept of divide and conquer.
And the idea of recursion which we've talked about to divide the problem down to do work on each subset
and then combining the solutions.
Now we're going to see how this actually works.
But I want to remind you that any time we see something like divide and conquer it usually gives you
a log of an advantage.
And as you can see here it is the last piece of the puzzle.
Oh of and log.
And that actually improves is better than all events squared.
The next couple of sorting algorithms we're going to look at are now going to have nested for loops
and have of hands and squared Instead they're going to have this time complexity which makes things
a lot better and saves companies a lot of time in order to understand what this means.
We have to start off with looking at Mirch sort Let's have a look at how it works and then I'm going
to explain what the benefits are.
We have the same list as before.
We're going to take this list and actually divide it in half and then we're going to divide each of
these subsets into half again.
And then we're going to divide those salbe lists into half again until we have one item and once we
have that divided up we're going to take the first item in second item and say hey which one should
I put first.
Let's put five first and then 6 right after and notice here how we're building a reverse tree in a sense
then we look at three and one and say one and three.
So we're getting closer and closer to that root note.
We're comparing eight and seven.
Seven comes before 8 2 and 4 2 before 4.
And now we again combine those lists in reverse tree saying 5 and 1 which one comes first one comes
first and then let's compare five and three.
Three comes first then five and six then we look on the right side we say seven and two two comes before
seven.
What about seven and four.
Four becomes before seven.
And because we know that seven and eight are already sorted we just place seven and eight right next
to each other.
And then finally we combine these last two lists into our root node to combine the list and make it
sorted one into three and four five.
And then 6 7 and 8 and we have our sorted list.
Now that looked extremely complicated a lot more complicated than the other sorting algorithms right.
Mersch surd is one of the most efficient ways you can sort a list of things and typically is going to
perform better than most other sorting algorithms.
And in terms of complexity Well it's definitely more complex isn't it.
We're using divide and conquer approach which should tip you off that it's going to use some sort of
recursion.
The first part of an log and that is an comes from the fact that we're still comparing everything we
have to look at each one of the numbers and compare them in order to sort it.
Now once we divide the list into one which finding the middle index of these things are actually of
one because it's an easy mathematical operation.
Get the length of the list and find the middle.
But once we divide the array we need to sort the items which is going to take over and we have to look
at every single item and actually sort them and were able to create the list but unlike bubble sort
for example although we have to compare everything at least once we don't have to compare everything
to everything like we did with bubble sort all we have to do is compare their local lists to each other
remember with something like bubble sort or insertion sort.
Once we went through the list once we then compared the next item to the rest of the list shirt is also
helpful because it's what we call stable which just means that if you have equivalent elements that
is let's say 6 and 6 or a name that is the same it will keep the original order in the array.
And this can sometimes be important depending on the type of data.
Let's have a look at its big-O.
We see that merge sword has all of and log and with space complexity of of an unlike bubble sort insertion
sort and selection sort.
We have a bit of a bigger space complexity because we have to hold onto that divided up list and memory.
So that is one downside of Merse sort but we've now managed to make our sorting algorithm a lot faster.
Now how do we implement March sort I have here for you an exercise I want to warn you this is really
difficult merge sort is really hard to implement and wrap your mind around.
If you don't feel comfortable with recursion it's going to be a little bit tough.
Keep in mind that I'm showing you here how to do it just for your own interest but most likely in an
interview you're never going to be asked to implement your own merge sort.
You're just going to be asked maybe how it's implemented and have created a little skeleton to help
you out here.
We have the merge sort that is going to have a function that takes an array.
We have the base case because we're going to use recursion here saying that went array length is one.
Remember there's only one item in the list.
That is when each one of this is at the top in its own list.
We're going to just return the array now in here.
We're going to return and we're going to merge sort the left hand side and the right hand side and we're
going to use this function merge that is going to merge the left hand and the right hand side.
So the first step is for you to split the array down the middle in the left hand and right hand side
in here.
Then run it with the emersed sort algorithm and in the merge function.
I want you to actually do the comparison.
I don't expect you to get this right away.
There's very few people that can do this.
Half of the top of their head but see if you can use all your resources available are disk or community
or even Google to figure out how to create your own sort.
And I'll see you in the solution video by.